Very-large-scale integration (VLSI) is the process of creating an integrated circuit (IC) 
by combining thousands of transistors into a single chip. VLSI began in the 1970s when complex 
semiconductor and communication technologies were being developed. The microprocessor is a VLSI 
device. Before the introduction of VLSI technology most ICs had a limited set of functions they 
could perform. An electronic circuit might consist of a CPU, ROM, RAM and other glue logic. 
VLSI lets IC designers add all of these into one chip.

The History of the transistor dates to the mid-1920s when several inventors attempted devices 
that were intended to control current in solid-state diodes and convert them into triodes. 
Success came after World War II, when the use of silicon and germanium crystals as radar 
detectors led to improvements in fabrication and theory. Scientists who had been diverted to 
radar development returned to solid-state device development. With the invention of transistors 
at Bell Labs in 1947, the field of electronics shifted from vacuum tubes to solid-state devices.

With the small transistor at their hands, electrical engineers of the 1950s saw the possibilities 
of constructing far more advanced circuits. As the complexity of circuits grew, problems arose.[1]

One problem was the size of the circuit. A complex circuit, like a computer, was dependent on 
speed. If the components of the computer were too large or the wires interconnecting them too 
long, the electric signals couldn't travel fast enough through the circuit, thus making the 
computer too slow to be effective.[1]

Jack Kilby at Texas Instruments found a solution to this problem in 1958. Kilby's idea was to 
make all the components and the chip out of the same block (monolith) of semiconductor material. 
In September 1958, his first integrated circuit was ready.[1] This crude beginning broke ground 
on a new idea. By making all the parts out of the same block of material and adding the connections 
as a layer on top, there was no need for discrete components, to be assembled manually. The circuits 
could be made smaller, and the manufacturing process could be automated. This led to the idea of 
integrating all components on a single silicon wafer came into existence, which led to development 
in small-scale integration (SSI) in the early 1960s, medium-scale integration (MSI) in the late 
1960s, and then large-scale integration (LSI) as well as VLSI in the 1970s and 1980s, with tens 
of thousands of transistors on a single chip (later hundreds of thousands, then millions, and now 
billions (109)).

The first semiconductor chips held two transistors each. Subsequent advances added more transistors, 
and as a consequence, more individual functions or systems were integrated over time. The first 
integrated circuits held only a few devices, perhaps as many as ten diodes, transistors, resistors 
and capacitors, making it possible to fabricate one or more logic gates on a single device. Now known 
retrospectively as small-scale integration (SSI), improvements in technique led to devices with 
hundreds of logic gates, known as medium-scale integration (MSI). Further improvements led to 
large-scale integration (LSI), i.e. systems with at least a thousand logic gates. Current technology 
has moved far past this mark and today's microprocessors have many millions of gates and billions 
of individual transistors.